NSF Workshop on Pervasive Computing at Scale
Smartphone Breakout Session Report
 
Leads: Andrew Campbell, Geoffrey Challen
Participants: Gaetano Borriello, Andrew Campbell, Roy Campbell, Geoff Challen, David Chu, Karthik Dantu, Sajal Das, Mario Di Francesco, Prabal Dutta, Mads Haahr, Ahmed Helmy, David Kotz, Narayanan Krishnan, Mohan Kumar, Thomas Little, Jie Liu, Mirco Musolesi, Kishore Ramachandran, Mahadev Satyanarayanan, Andreas Savvides, Bill Schilit, David Wetherall, Vincent Wong, Feng Zhao, Gang Zhou
1 — Introduction
 
Phones are the first truly pervasive mobile computing technology. Between 1990 and 2010 the number of mobile phones subscriptions grew by two orders of magnitude. Today’s phones are migrating from so-called feature phones limited to voice and text messaging to smartphones, integrating powerful processors, multiple communication technologies, ample storage and sensor suites. Phones are where people are and the capabilities of emerging smartphone devices cause them to be our current best option for implementing the pervasive computing vision at truly global scale.
2 — Current Status
 
Today’s smartphone is as powerful as larger mobile devices—such as laptops—were only a few years ago. It features multiple processors, including many specialized for specific tasks. It can communicate data to cellular towers using 3G and 4G, 802.11 access points using Wi-Fi, and a variety of other devices over Bluetooth. Increasingly cell phones are providing last-hop communication to body area and other deployed sensors. Cheap and plentiful storage allows phones to cache a great deal of information, and the growing power of the cloud allows them to potentially offload expensive or time-consuming computation. The emergence of application distribution channels like the Apple AppStore and Google Android Market have accelerated innovation in the smartphone space by providing developers easy access to the millions of deployed iPhone and Android devices.
3 — Vision and Challenges
 
To frame our discussion of the future of smartphone research, our session outlined a vision of the phone of the future—Phone 2020. We describe the capabilities of this new platform and some applications to expect to move to or be developed for this phone of the future below. Working backward, we develop a set of research challenges currently limiting our progress towards Phone 2020.
 
3.1 Phone 2020: The Next Decade of the Smartphone
 
In an increasingly distracted world filled with information, Phone 2020 will help us deal with this data deluge by offloading much of the current human burden caused by information overload. Despite the fact that Phone 2020 is itself continuously capturing large quantities of data about our lives—including location traces, readings from internal and external sensors, and logs of our mobile-based activities—and contributing to the steady increase in data collection, it will also help analyze and interpret these new data streams to maximize their value. By learning our patterns, Phone 2020 will be able to make suggestions about our daily lives, anticipate our actions, and will become increasingly woven into the fabric of our existence and involved in a variety of new undertakings.
 
In order to assist us, the future phone will interact with everything—other phones, the cloud, nearby sensors and actuators, vehicles and buildings—and display information in ways that suit each user. It will process the environment and proactively help us discover and navigate the world around us, including visibility into social networks. By better understanding its user, the Phone 2020 will manage their attention and know when to interrupt. Through an increase in its own capabilities and by seamlessly inter-operating with powerful cloud resources, Phone 2020 will be on the way to making desktop and laptop computers obsolete.
 
The new capabilities of Phone 2020 will drive exciting new applications and open up new markets. Smartphones will enter and define the classroom of the future. They will augment reality to further education, socialization, health care and gaming. They will sense reality to manage cities, workplaces and traffic while continuously recording our digital lives. Smartphones of the future will help us work more efficiently by constituting a real mobile office and personal digital assistant, conserving useful working hours and creating time for leisure and entertainment. We expect future applications to be long-lived—leveraging continued interaction with users over time—and local—perhaps exploiting the density of smartphone penetration to augment or replace communications infrastructure, critical in developing countries where this infrastructure may be nonexistent or unreliable. The sheer number of smartphones and their colocation with their human users may make them a critical component of future approaches to disaster relief and emergency management.
 
We also foresee the continued integration of phones with online social networks. Smartphones are already the quintessential social device. From voice to electronic communication, the desire of people to connect with each other drove the initial adoption of cellular phone technologies to the scales currently achieved. Now that social networking has taken off on the Internet, we see opportunities to further unite the social network with the social device. This can help us further understand the structure of existing social networks, while phones also assist in the formation of ad-hoc social networks grounded in physical gatherings of people with similar interests. In the context of social networks we should also not ignore the potential for phones to contribute to network science by monitoring user behavior and assisting in social applications like tracking disease propagation.
 
3.2 Challenges
 
In order to build Phone 2020, we identified a number of challenges that our community must address. These roughly divide into three categories: developing the capabilities of phone and their environment, improving interaction between phones and users, and coping with the potential for massive large-scale data collection using phones as sensors.
 
The Phone 2020 vision is predicated on continued improvements to smartphone and smartphone infrastructure performance. Future smartphones must be more powerful, communicate more quickly, store more data, and integrate new interaction technologies. Unfortunately, these goals are at odds with data bandwidth and battery capacities, both of which are scaling slowly. We expect future phones to deploy opportunistic algorithms that multiplex both time and space in order to improve performance.
 
The overall heterogeneity of deployed devices and standards is another challenge limiting device-to-device inter-operability, which itself limits the ability of the phone to interact with all of the other devices it encounters. We also discussed the importance of integrating the smartphone with existing Wi-Fi networks to improve connectivity and network performance. Suggestions were made that peer-to-peer architectures may be worth revisiting as a way of improving performance, particularly in the case where infrastructure is lacking.
 
Another property that is not scaling is human attention. We already pay too much attention to our smartphones to believe that we have achieved the invisibility desired by early visions of ubiquitous computing, and this problem seems destined to worsen as the capabilities of phones and the amount of collected information increase. In order to better optimize our attention future smartphones must deploy better interfaces allowing more nuanced interaction with users, including processing emotional cues. To improve the interaction between humans and their devices, new algorithms must be developed enabling behavior-based modeling, computing, and testing. In addition, user interfaces need to be reconsidered, including a number that, while unsuitable for larger devices, may be well-suited to phones. The smartphone of 2020, with its ability to interact seamlessly with objects around it, will be able to leverage “found” interface elements in the environment to enable much richer interaction modalities than those possible on the phone itself.
 
Smartphones hold the potential both to contribute to and to alleviate the growing data deluge. Large-scale deployment of sensor suites on smartphones combined with cheap bandwidth and storage will lead to a growing amount of data produced by the phones of the future. Securing this information—much of it sensitive and personal—will be one major challenge. 
 
Initially designed as a personal device, smartphones and increasingly interacting with each other and the environment, creating new opportunities to steal and misuse information. Developing security and privacy models that users can understand and adapt to their needs is a critical challenge to the continued advance of smartphone technology.
 
Interpreting and processing the collected data it is another challenge. There are opportunities for harnessing the distributed power of large numbers of smartphones through collaborative computation. These capabilities, if developed, might complement the continued aggregation of computation in the cloud. Fundamentally, however, the phone of the future will be a portal to the intelligent processing and management of data in order to reduce user distraction and allow them to focus their attention elsewhere.
4 — Recommendations to NSF
 
When developing our recommendations to NSF we focused on areas in which the research community could make significant and distinct contributions. Industry is already very active in this space and has many advantages, particularly when working at scale. However, we conclude that there are opportunities for the academic research community to develop the future smartphone in directions complementary to those being pursued in industry.
4.1 Research Support
 
We recommend that the NSF develop research programs addressing the key challenges to realizing the Phone 2020 vision outlined above:
 
1. We need to continue the forward development of smartphone and infrastructural capabilities to support demanding new applications.
2. We must tear down the walls that separate devices from each other and limit the ability of the phone to fully understand its environment.
3. We need better interfaces allowing the future phone to conserve the most precious resource of all: human attention.
4. We need phones to help users cope with the ever increasing amount of data both accessible to them and collected about them.
5. We need security and privacy models that users can understand and adapt to match their expectations and the current context – the highly dynamic pool of surrounding devices and communications channels, the social setting, and the user’s activity. 
6. We believe it is important to understand and document our continued co-evolution with our mobile devices: how we are not only changing them, but how they are changing us.
4.2 Infrastructure Support
 
If academics are to succeed in complementing industry, the NSF must provide them with the resources and infrastructure allowing us to experiment at scale. NSF can also take a role in partnering with industrial players in order to gain access to resources like large numbers of phones, air time, call logs or other large data sets. Further partnerships with industry might also allow us to do citizen-driven science in other areas leveraging the smart phones as a pervasive computing platform.
Application distribution channels like the Android Market and Google AppStore also provide academics with the opportunity to deploy research systems at scale by leveraging channels established by industry. We can release our own code on the AppStore, perhaps piggybacking on top of other popular applications. Users worldwide might be willing to participate in a large-scale virtual laboratory. At sufficient scale such a laboratory could provide built-in guarantees to researchers allowing academic research to reach large numbers of deployed smartphones.
 
4.3 Educational Opportunities
 
One germane direction for the academic community to explore is in the use of pervasive smartphone technology to enhance education and learning. The future phone may enter the classroom and help put lessons in context, as well as extending the reach of learning outside the classroom in novel ways.
 
We also believe future growth in the smartphone area will rely on educating the next generation of computer scientists on smartphone development. Of particular interest are training engineers that can help integrate the phone and the cloud in ways that harness the properties and capabilities of both. We recommend support for the continued development of classes based on smartphone platforms and also those that explore smartphone-cloud interaction.